Document `p4est` interfacing (#2347)
trixi-framework/Trixi.jl: docs/src/p4est_interfacing.md

# Interfacing to the `p4est` mesh backend

Sometimes it is necessary to send data from the solver to the mesh backend.
In the case of [`p4est`](https://www.p4est.org/) these are relatively decoupled, in contrast to the other mesh types.

As a disclaimer: This is neither complete nor self-contained, and is meant as a first orientation guide.

> To implement own features, you likely need to take a look at the [`p4est`](https://github.com/cburstedde/p4est), it's Julia wrapper [`P4est.jl`](https://github.com/trixi-framework/P4est.jl) and relevant parts of the [`Trixi.jl`](https://github.com/trixi-framework/Trixi.jl) source code.

Author: ```suggestion
To implement own features, you likely need to take a look at the [`p4est`](https://github.com/cburstedde/p4est), it's Julia wrapper [`P4est.jl`](https://github.com/trixi-framework/P4est.jl) and relevant parts of the [`Trixi.jl`](https://github.com/trixi-framework/Trixi.jl) source code.
Additionally, the [documentation of the Julia `C` interface](https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/base/c/) is also helpful.
```

> # Interfacing to the `p4est` mesh backend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Interfacing with the `p4est` mesh backend
```

> Sometimes it is necessary to send data from the solver to the mesh backend.
> In the case of [`p4est`](https://www.p4est.org/) these are relatively decoupled, in contrast to the other mesh types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes it is necessary to exchange data between the solver and the mesh.
In the case of the [`P4estMesh`](@ref) and its [`p4est`](https://www.p4est.org/), this is more intricate than with other mesh types, since the p4est backend
is comparatively opaque to the rest of the code due to being a compiled C library.
```

As a disclaimer: This is neither complete nor self-contained, and is meant as a first orientation guide.

> To implement own features, you likely need to take a look at the [`p4est`](https://github.com/cburstedde/p4est), it's Julia wrapper [`P4est.jl`](https://github.com/trixi-framework/P4est.jl) and relevant parts of the [`Trixi.jl`](https://github.com/trixi-framework/Trixi.jl) source code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To implement own features, you likely need to take a look at the documentation of [`p4est`](https://github.com/cburstedde/p4est), its Julia wrapper [P4est.jl](https://github.com/trixi-framework/P4est.jl), and relevant parts of the [Trixi.jl](https://github.com/trixi-framework/Trixi.jl) source code.
```
`p4est` is always styled in monospace font, while for Julia packages we just append `.jl` and use regular font.

> Additionally, the [documentation of the Julia `C` interface](https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/base/c/) is also helpful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, the [Julia manual for interfacing C code](https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/manual/calling-c-and-fortran-code/) and the [documentation of the Julia C interface](https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/base/c/) are also helpful.
```

First, we go through the implementation of adaptive mesh refinement (AMR) with `p4est`.
Second, we show how a custom mesh partitioning based on a weighting function can be implemented.

## Adaptive Mesh Refinement (AMR)

> For instance, in a simulation that uses adaptive mesh refinement (AMR) cells are equipped with an indicator value $I \in \{-1, 0, 1\}$ that indicates whether the cell should be coarsened ($I = -1$), kept at the current size ($I = 0$) or be refined ($I = 1$).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a simulation that uses adaptive mesh refinement (AMR), cells are assigned an indicator value $I \in \{-1, 0, 1\}$ that denotes whether the cell should be coarsened ($I = -1$), kept at the current level ($I = 0$), or be refined ($I = 1$).
```

> For realizing AMR there are now in principle two possibilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For realizing AMR there are now in principle two possibilities:
```

- First, the solver could receive the connectivity information from the mesh backend and then handle the refinement and coarsening of the mesh.
- Second, the solver could send the indicator values to the mesh backend and let it handle the refinement and coarsening of the mesh.

> For the `p4est` mesh Trixi.jl uses the latter approach to benefit from the highly efficient implementation of the `p4est` library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the `p4est` mesh, Trixi.jl uses the latter approach to benefit from the highly efficient implementation of the `p4est` library.
```

The first step involves sending the indicator values to the mesh backend.

> The indicator values `lambda` are obtained in the `AMRCallback`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The indicator values `lambda` are obtained from a "controller" in the `AMRCallback`
```

```julia
lambda = @trixi_timeit timer() "indicator" controller(u, mesh, equations, dg, cache,
                                                      t = t, iter = iter)

> ```

Author: Sure! I did this now with permalinks for the Trixi code and with Docu+Implementation for the p4est functions

and need now to be sent to the mesh backend.

> To this end, a couple helper functions need to be implemented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To this end, a number of helper functions are required.
```

> First, a Julia function with two arguments `info, user_data` is defined that copies the indicator values from `user_data` to a field in `info`, which is a field from the `p4est` mesh (precisely `p4est_iter_volume_info_t` - for details see the [`p4est` documentation](https://p4est.github.io/api/p4est-latest/p4est__iterate_8h.html)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, a Julia function with two arguments `info, user_data` is defined that copies the indicator values from `user_data` to a field in `info`, which is a field from the `p4est` mesh (precisely `p4est_iter_volume_info_t` - for details see the [`p4est` documentation](https://p4est.github.io/api/p4est-latest/p4est__iterate_8h.html)):
```

```julia
# Copy controller values to p4est quad user data storage
function copy_to_quad_iter_volume(info, user_data)
    info_pw = PointerWrapper(info)

    # Load tree from global trees array, one-based indexing
    tree_pw = load_pointerwrapper_tree(info_pw.p4est, info_pw.treeid[] + 1)
    # Quadrant numbering offset of this quadrant
    offset = tree_pw.quadrants_offset[]
    # Global quad ID
    quad_id = offset + info_pw.quadid[]

    # Access user_data = `lambda`
    user_data_pw = PointerWrapper(Int, user_data)
    # Load controller_value = `lambda[quad_id + 1]`
    controller_value = user_data_pw[quad_id + 1]

    # Access quadrant's user data `[global quad ID, controller_value]`
    quad_data_pw = PointerWrapper(Int, info_pw.quad.p.user_data[])
    # Save controller value to quadrant's user data.
    quad_data_pw[2] = controller_value

    return nothing
end
```

> This function is then converted to a `C` function to match the required syntax of the [`p4est_iter_volume_t`](https://p4est.github.io/api/p4est-latest/p4est__iterate_8h.html)/[`p8est_iter_volume_t`](https://p4est.github.io/api/p4est-latest/p8est__iterate_8h.html#a4b19423fb264c674bd4deaf5a7194758) function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This function is then converted to a C function to match the required syntax of the [`p4est_iter_volume_t`](https://p4est.github.io/api/p4est-latest/p4est__iterate_8h.html)/[`p8est_iter_volume_t`](https://p4est.github.io/api/p4est-latest/p8est__iterate_8h.html#a4b19423fb264c674bd4deaf5a7194758) function:
```

```C
/** The prototype for a function that p4est_iterate will execute at every
 * quadrant local to the current process.
 * \param [in] info          information about a quadrant provided to the user
 * \param [in,out] user_data the user context passed to p4est_iterate()
 */
typedef void (*p4est_iter_volume_t) (p4est_iter_volume_info_t * info,
                                     void *user_data);

/** The prototype for a function that p8est_iterate() will execute at every
 * quadrant local to the current process.
 * \param [in] info          information about a quadrant provided to the user
 * \param [in,out] user_data the user context passed to p8est_iterate()
 */
typedef void (*p8est_iter_volume_t) (p8est_iter_volume_info_t * info,
                                     void *user_data);
```

> To handle both 2D (which is the canonical `p4est`) and 3D (which is within the `p4est` library referred to as `p8est`) a dispatch on the mesh dimensionality is included:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To handle both 2D (which is the canonical `p4est`) and 3D (which is within the `p4est` library referred to as `p8est`), we also dispatch on the number of spatial dimensions:
```

```julia
# 2D
function cfunction(::typeof(copy_to_quad_iter_volume), ::Val{2})
    @cfunction(copy_to_quad_iter_volume, 
               # Note the matching signature to the C function: 
               Cvoid, # Return type
               # Parameters
               (Ptr{p4est_iter_volume_info_t}, Ptr{Cvoid}))
end
# 3D
function cfunction(::typeof(copy_to_quad_iter_volume), ::Val{3})
    @cfunction(copy_to_quad_iter_volume, 
               # Note the matching signature to the C function
               Cvoid, # Return type
               # Parameters
               (Ptr{p8est_iter_volume_info_t}, Ptr{Cvoid}))
end
```

The correct function is then selected via
```julia
iter_volume_c = cfunction(copy_to_quad_iter_volume, Val(ndims(mesh)))
```

> and by calling `iterate_p4est` the indicator values are finally copied to the quadrants/cells/elements of the mesh:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and by calling `iterate_p4est` the indicator values are finally copied to the cells (quadrants or octants) of the mesh:
```
Meshes do not have "elements" in Trixi.jl-speak, only cells. The elements are part of the solver. We make that distinction to make it unambiguous about what we are talking

```julia
iterate_p4est(mesh.p4est, # The p4est mesh
              lambda; # The indicator values
              # The function that copies the indicator values to the mesh
              iter_volume_c = iter_volume_c)
```

> Now, during the `refine!` or `coarsen!` calls (which eventually call [`refine_fn`](https://p4est.github.io/api/p4est-latest/p4est_8h.html#a1a31375edfa42b5609e7656233c32cca)/[`coarsen_fn`](https://p4est.github.io/api/p4est-latest/p4est_8h.html#ad250f4765d9778ec3940e9fabea7c853) from `p4est`) the indicator values are available in the user data of the quadrants/cells/elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, during the `refine!` or `coarsen!` calls (which eventually call [`refine_fn`](https://p4est.github.io/api/p4est-latest/p4est_8h.html#a1a31375edfa42b5609e7656233c32cca)/[`coarsen_fn`](https://p4est.github.io/api/p4est-latest/p4est_8h.html#ad250f4765d9778ec3940e9fabea7c853) from `p4est`) the indicator values are available in the user data of the mesh cells.
```

    # Use `unsafe_load` here since `quadrant.p.user_data isa Ptr{Ptr{Nothing}}`
    # and we only need the first (only!) entry
    pw = PointerWrapper(Int, unsafe_load(quadrant.p.user_data))
    controller_value = pw[2]

    if controller_value > 0
        # return true (refine)
        return Cint(1)
    else
        # return false (don't refine)
        return Cint(0)
    end
end
```
Again, dimensional dispatching is used to handle both 2D and 3D meshes:
```julia
# 2D
function cfunction(::typeof(refine_fn), ::Val{2})
    @cfunction(refine_fn, 
               # Note the matching signature to the C function
               Cint, # Return type
               # Parameters
               (Ptr{p4est_t}, Ptr{p4est_topidx_t}, Ptr{p4est_quadrant_t}))
end
# 3D
function cfunction(::typeof(refine_fn), ::Val{3})
    @cfunction(refine_fn, 
               # Note the matching signature to the C function
               Cint, # Return type
               # Parameters
               (Ptr{p8est_t}, Ptr{p4est_topidx_t}, Ptr{p8est_quadrant_t}))
end
```
These are then handed over to `refine_p4est!` which eventually calls `refine_fn`.

> ## Custom Mesh Partitioning

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Custom mesh partitioning
```

> Analogous to the AMR example above, we now discuss how to implement a custom mesh partitioning based on a weighting function/array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Analogous to the AMR example above, we now discuss how to implement a custom mesh partitioning based on custom cell weighting.
```

> This might be required for distributed memory (i.e., `MPI`-parallelized simulations) to achieve a more uniform distribution of the computational work across the different processes.
> This is important to maintain scalability and to avoid load imbalance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This might be required for distributed memory (i.e., MPI-parallelized simulations) to achieve a more uniform distribution of the computational work across the different processes.
This is important to maintain scalability and to avoid load imbalance.
```

We begin again by copying in the solver data.

> Here we assume that the weighting should be done based on the user data `rhs_per_element` which arises for instance in multirate/local time-stepping solvers where the computational work per cell is no longer uniform, but can be estimated by the number of right-hand-side (RHS) evaluations per cell.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we assume that the weighting should be done based on the user data `rhs_per_element`, which arises for instance in multirate/local time-stepping solvers where the computational work per cell is no longer uniform, but can be estimated by the number of right-hand-side (RHS) evaluations per cell.
```

> So the function which saves this user data could look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus a function, which saves this user data to the mesh, could look like this:
```

    # Unpack quadrant's user data ([global quad ID, controller_value]).
    # Use `unsafe_load` here since `quadrant.p.user_data isa Ptr{Ptr{Nothing}}`
    # and we only need the first (only!) entry
    pw = PointerWrapper(Int, unsafe_load(quadrant.p.user_data))
    controller_value = pw[2]

    if controller_value > 0
        # return true (refine)
        return Cint(1)
    else
        # return false (don't refine)
        return Cint(0)
    end
end
```
Again, dimensional dispatching is used to handle both 2D and 3D meshes:
```julia
# 2D
function cfunction(::typeof(refine_fn), ::Val{2})
    @cfunction(refine_fn, 
               # Note the matching signature to the C function
               Cint, # Return type
               # Parameters
               (Ptr{p4est_t}, Ptr{p4est_topidx_t}, Ptr{p4est_quadrant_t}))
end
# 3D
function cfunction(::typeof(refine_fn), ::Val{3})
    @cfunction(refine_fn, 
               # Note the matching signature to the C function
               Cint, # Return type
               # Parameters
               (Ptr{p8est_t}, Ptr{p4est_topidx_t}, Ptr{p8est_quadrant_t}))
end
```

> These are then handed over to `refine_p4est!` which eventually calls `refine_fn`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These are then handed over to `refine_p4est!`, which eventually calls `refine_fn`.
```

## Custom mesh partitioning

Analogous to the AMR example above, we now discuss how to implement a custom mesh partitioning based on custom cell weighting.
This might be required for distributed memory (i.e., MPI-parallelized simulations) to achieve a more uniform distribution of the computational work across the different processes.
This is important to maintain scalability and to avoid load imbalance.

> We begin again by copying in the solver data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We begin again by copying the solver data.
```

Here we assume that the weighting should be done based on the user data `rhs_per_element`, which arises for instance in multirate/local time-stepping solvers where the computational work per cell is no longer uniform, but can be estimated by the number of right-hand-side (RHS) evaluations per cell.

> Thus a function, which saves this user data to the mesh, could look like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thus, a function, which saves this user data to the mesh, could look like this:
```
